In the previous video,
we gave a mathematical
definition of gradient descent.
Let's delve deeper and in this video get
better intuition about what the algorithm
is doing and why the steps of the gradient
descent algorithm might make sense.
Here's a gradient descent algorithm
that we saw last time and
just to remind you this parameter, or this
term alpha is called the learning rate.
And it controls how big a step we take
when updating my parameter theory j.
And this second term here
is the derivative term
And what I wanna do in this video is give
you that intuition about what each of
these two terms is doing and why when put
together, this entire update makes sense.
In order to convey these intuitions, what
I want to do is use a slightly simpler
example, where we want to minimize
the function of just one parameter.
So say we have a cost function,
j of just one parameter,
theta one, like we did a few videos back,
where theta one is a real number.
So we can have one d plots,
which are a little bit simpler to look at.
Let's try to understand what gradient
decent would do on this function.
So let's say, here's my function,
J of theta 1.
And so that's mine.
And where theta 1 is a real number.
All right?
Now, let's have in this slide its grade in
descent with theta one at this location.
So imagine that we start off
at that point on my function.
What grade in descent would
do is it will update.
Theta one gets updated as
theta one minus alpha times
d d theta one J of theta one, right?
And as an aside, this derivative term,
right, if you're
wondering why I changed the notation
from these partial derivative symbols.
If you don't know what the difference is
between these partial derivative symbols
and the dd theta, don't worry about it.
Technically in mathematics you
call this a partial derivative and
call this a derivative, depending on the
number of parameters in the function J.
But that's a mathematical technicality.
And so for the purpose of this lecture,
think of these partial symbols and d,
d theta 1, as exactly the same thing.
And don't worry about what
the real difference is.
I'm gonna try to use the mathematically
precise notation, but for
our purposes these two notations
are really the same thing.
And so
let's see what this equation will do.
So we're going to compute this derivative,
not sure if you've seen derivatives in
calculus before, but what the derivative
at this point does, is basically saying,
now let's take the tangent to that point,
like that straight line, that red line,
is just touching this function, and
let's look at the slope of this red line.
That's what the derivative is,
it's saying what's the slope of the line
that is just tangent to the function.
Okay, the slope of a line is just this
height divided by this horizontal thing.
Now, this line has a positive slope,
so it has a positive derivative.
And so
my update to theta is going to be theta 1,
it gets updated as theta 1,
minus alpha times some positive number.
Okay.
Alpha the the learning,
is always a positive number.
And, so we're going to take theta one is
updated as theta one minus something.
So I'm gonna end up moving
theta one to the left.
I'm gonna decrease theta one,
and we can see this is the right
thing to do cuz I actually
wanna head in this direction.
You know, to get me closer
to the minimum over there.
So, gradient descent so
far says we're going the right thing.
Let's look at another example.
So let's take my same function J,
let's try to draw from the same function,
J of theta 1.
And now, let's say I had to say initialize
my parameter over there on the left.
So theta 1 is here.
I glare at that point on the surface.
Now my derivative term DV theta one
J of theta one when you value into
that this point, we're gonna look
at right the slope of that line,
so this derivative term
is a slope of this line.
But this line is slanting down,
so this line has negative slope.
Right.
Or alternatively, I say that this
function has negative derivative,
just means negative slope at that point.
So this is less than equals to 0, so
when I update theta, I'm gonna have theta.
Just update this theta of minus
alpha times a negative number.
And so I have theta 1 minus a negative
number which means I'm actually going to
increase theta,
because it's minus of a negative number,
means I'm adding something to theta.
And what that means is that I'm
going to end up increasing theta
until it's not here, and increase theta
wish again seems like the thing I wanted
to do to try to get me
closer to the minimum.
So this whole theory of intuition
behind what a derivative is doing,
let's take a look at the rate term
alpha and see what that's doing.
So here's my gradient descent
update mural, that's this equation.
And let's look at what could happen
if alpha is either too small or
if alpha is too large.
So this first example,
what happens if alpha is too small?
So here's my function J, J of theta.
Let's all start here.
If alpha is too small, then what
I'm gonna do is gonna multiply my
update by some small number, so
end up taking a baby step like that.
Okay, so this one step.
Then from this new point,
I'm gonna have to take another step.
But if alpha's too small,
I take another little baby step.
And so if my learning rate is
too small I'm gonna end up
taking these tiny tiny baby steps
as you try to get to the minimum.
And I'm gonna need a lot of steps
to get to the minimum and so
if alpha is too small gradient
descent can be slow because it's gonna
take these tiny tiny baby steps and so
it's gonna need a lot of steps before it
gets anywhere close to the global minimum.
Now how about if our alpha is too large?
So, here's my function Jf filter,
turns out that alpha's too large,
then gradient descent can overshoot the
minimum and may even fail to convert or
even divert, so here's what I mean.
Let's say it's all our data there,
it's actually close to minimum.
So the derivative points to the right,
but if alpha is too big,
I want to take a huge step.
Remember, take a huge step like that.
So it ends up taking a huge step, and
now my cost functions have strong roots.
Cuz it starts off with this value, and
now, my values are strong in verse.
Now my derivative points to the left,
it says I should decrease data.
But if my learning is too big,
I may take a huge step going from
here all the way to out there.
So we end up being over there, right?
And if my is too big, we can take another
huge step on the next elevation and
kind of overshoot and overshoot and
so on, until you already notice
I'm actually getting further and
further away from the minimum.
So if alpha is to large,
it can fail to converge or even diverge.
Now, I have another question for you.
So this a tricky one and when I was first
learning this stuff it actually took me
a long time to figure this out.
What if your parameter theta 1
is already at a local minimum,
what do you think one step
of gradient descent will do?
So let's suppose you initialize
theta 1 at a local minimum.
So, suppose this is your initial
value of theta 1 over here and
is already at a local optimum or
the local minimum.
It turns out the local optimum,
your derivative will be equal to zero.
So for that slope, that tangent point,
so the slope of this line
will be equal to zero and thus this
derivative term is equal to zero.
And so your gradient descent update,
you have theta one cuz I updated this
theta one minus alpha times zero.
And so what this means is that if you're
already at the local optimum it leaves
theta 1 unchanged cause its
updates as theta 1 equals theta 1.
So if your parameters are already
at a local minimum one
step with gradient descent does absolutely
nothing it doesn't your parameter
which is what you want because it keeps
your solution at the local optimum.
This also explains why gradient
descent can converse the local minimum
even with the learning rate alpha fixed.
Here's what I mean by that
let's look in the example.
So here's a cost function J of theta
that maybe I want to minimize and
let's say I initialize my algorithm,
my gradient descent algorithm,
out there at that magenta point.
If I take one step in gradient descent,
maybe it will take me to that point,
because my derivative's
pretty steep out there.
Right?
Now, I'm at this green point, and if I
take another step in gradient descent,
you notice that my derivative,
meaning the slope, is less steep at
the green point than compared to
at the magenta point out there.
Because as I approach the minimum, my
derivative gets closer and closer to zero,
as I approach the minimum.
So after one step of descent,
my new derivative is a little bit smaller.
So I wanna take another step
in the gradient descent.
I will naturally take a somewhat smaller
step from this green point right
there from the magenta point.
Now with a new point, a red point, and
I'm even closer to global minimum so
the derivative here will be even
smaller than it was at the green point.
So I'm gonna another step
in the gradient descent.
Now, my derivative term is even
smaller and so the magnitude of
the update to theta one is even smaller,
so take a small step like so.
And as gradient descent runs, you
will automatically take smaller and
smaller steps.
Until eventually you're taking
very small steps, you know, and
you finally converge to
the to the local minimum.
So just to recap, in gradient descent
as we approach a local minimum,
gradient descent will
automatically take smaller steps.
And that's because as we
approach the local minimum,
by definition the local minimum is
when the derivative is equal to zero.
As we approach local minimum, this
derivative term will automatically get
smaller, and so gradient descent will
automatically take smaller steps.
This is what so
no need to decrease alpha or the time.
So that's the gradient descent algorithm
and you can use it to try to minimize
any cost function J, not the cost function
J that we defined for linear regression.
In the next video,
we're going to take the function J and
set that back to be exactly linear
regression's cost function,
the square cost function that
we came up with earlier.
And taking gradient descent and this great
cause function and putting them together.
That will give us our
first learning algorithm,
that'll give us a linear
regression algorithm.